Index spi (#162)
pinot-contrib/pinot-docs: basics/indexing/forward-index.md

> # Forward Index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Forward index
```

> At conceptual level, the forward index is a map from document id (aka row index) to the actual column value of the row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At conceptual level, the forward index is a map from the document ID (aka row index) to the actual column value of the row.
```

> How this map is implemented depends on the index encoding and on whether the column is sorted or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The forward index implementation depends on the index encoding and whether the column is sorted or not.
```

Author: I think it makes sense to use map here. We said that the forward index is a map and now we say that this map is implemented in a specific way depending on some variables.

> When encoding is `RAW`, the forward index is implemented as an array whose indexes are the document ids and the values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When encoding is `RAW`, the forward index is implemented as an array whose indexes are the document IDs and the values
```

are the actual row value. 

> Read the [raw value forward type](forward-index.md#raw-value-forward-index) to learn more about that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more, see the [raw value forward type](forward-index.md#raw-value-forward-index).
```

> When the encoding is `DICTIONARY`, the forward index does not physically store the actual row values but the dictionary ids.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the encoding is `DICTIONARY`, the forward index does not physically store the actual row values but the dictionary IDs.
```

Author: I've accepted all this ids -> IDs change, but TBH they look very strange to me. It is pretty common in technical documents to talk about `ids` instead of `IDs`. The later looks more like an ID card than the concept of `id` we use here.

This means that there is an extra indirection each time a value has to be read, but enable two more efficient physical 

> layouts depending on whether the segment is sorted by this column or not.

Reviewer: and enables?

what determines which layout is more efficient?

The [dictionary encoded forward index](forward-index.md#dictionary-encoded-forward-index-with-bit-compression-default) 
and [sorted forward index](forward-index.md#sorted-forward-index-with-run-length-encoding) explain each option in detail.

## Configuration

> Forward indexes are enabled by default.
> This means that columns will contain a forward index unless they are explicitly disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Forward indexes are enabled by default. 
```

> By doing so, most scanning access to the data will be disabled, but this is useful when other indexes are sufficient to cover the required data patterns.

Reviewer: When the forward index is enabled, most scanning...?

Author: Here `By doing so` refers to the act of disabling the index. If we remove that using the previous suggestion we would need to rephrase this line.

> Read the [disabling forward index section](forward-index.md#disabling-the-forward-index) in order to have some examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For examples, see [Disabling the forward index](forward-index.md#disabling-the-forward-index) .
```

> As explained bellow, the encoding and whether the segment is sorted by the indexed column are two important properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The encoding and whether the segment is sorted by the indexed column are two important properties.
```

They can be configured in [table config](../../configuration-reference/table.md).

> When encoding is raw, forward indexes can be extra customized, as explained in the [raw encoding section](forward-index.md#raw-value-forward-index).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When encoding is raw, forward indexes can be customized further. For more information, see the [raw encoding section](forward-index.md#raw-value-forward-index).
```

The Sorted forward index has the advantages of both good compression and data locality. The Sorted forward index can also be used as an inverted index.

> Sorted forward index are active when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sorted forward index are active when the following criteria are true:
```

> * The segment is sorted by this column

Reviewer: by what column?

Author: Indexes are applied column by column. So sorted forward index will be applied for any column `c` if the table is sorted by that column `c`.

> * The dictionary is enabled for that column (see [dictionary documentation page](dictionary-index.md)).

Reviewer: in general, it's helpful to clarify "that" and "this" if possible

> If you are ingesting multiple segments you will need to make sure that data is sorted within each segment - you don't need to sort the data across segments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are ingesting multiple segments, make sure that data is sorted within each segment. You don't need to sort the data across segments.
```

Author: The rephrase changes the meaning of the text.

What I want to say is:
1. The user is responsible to sort rows in the same segment. That means that for all two rows `r1` and `r2`, if `r1` position is lower than `r2`, then the value of the indexed column for `r1` must be <= than the value of that column for `r2`. A violation in this invariant will produce a segment where the column is not sorted.
2. Each segment is independent of each other. Therefore there is no invariant between rows of different segments. For example, if `r1` belongs to segment `s1` and `r21` and `r22` belong to another segment `s2`, then `r1` may be smaller than `r21` and larger than `r22`. There is no order restriction between rows in different segments.

Therefore you need to make sure that data is sorted within each segment *but* you don't need to sort the data across segments. The first condition (sorting rows within a segment) has nothing to do with the second (to require or not to sort data across segments). Therefore I don't think `so` should be used here.

Reviewer: > Make sure that data is sorted within each segment but you don't need to sort the data across segments. The first condition (sorting rows within a segment) has nothing to do with the second (to require or not to sort data across segments). Therefore I don't think so should be used here.

Remove "so" to be sure these conditions aren't linked. The first sentence is clear. For the second sentence, "You don't need to sort..." it'd be helpful to consider:
- Although they don't need to sort across segments, is it ok if they do? If the answer's no, we could clarify: In this case, we do not recommend sorting across segments.
- If they can choose to sort data across segments or not, we could say: "Although you may choose to sort data across segments, it's not required."

> How to make sure that a segment is sorted by the column depends on the type of table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure a segment is sorted by the column, do the following:
```

> * In real-time tables `tableIndexConfig.sortedColumn` can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In real-time tables, use `tableIndexConfig.sortedColumn`.
```

>   If there is exactly one column in that array, Pinot will sort the segment by that column when it is committed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If there is exactly one column in that array, Pinot sorts the segment by that column when it is committed.
```

> * In offline tables, `tableIndexConfig.sortedColumn` is ignored and you will need to sort the data by that column before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In offline tables, the `tableIndexConfig.sortedColumn` parameter is ignored, so you'll need to sort the data by that column before
```

  ingesting it into Pinot.

When a real-time segment is committed and when an offline segment created, Pinot will do a pass over the data in each 

> column and consider sorted any column that contains sorted data, even if they aren't specified as the `sortedColumn`.

Reviewer: When both a real-time segment is committed and an offline segment is created
Or
When a real-time segment is committed or an offline segment is created

> Use the following table config as an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following table configuration as an example:
```

    }
}
```
{% endcode %}

{% hint style="info" %}
**Remember that**: 

> * Although `sortedColumns` expects an array, only 1 sorted column can be added.

Reviewer: why does `sortedColumns` expect an array when only one sorted column can be added?

> * `tableIndexConfig.sortedColumn` is only honored in real-time tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `tableIndexConfig.sortedColumn` (Supported for real-time tables only)
```

> * The sorted property affects Pinot behavior beyond forward index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The sorted property affects Pinot behavior beyond the forward index.
```

>   For example, sorted segments behaves better on queries that order by in-segment sorted columns.

Reviewer: what do we mean by "in-segment"....are there sorted columns outside of segments?

![](../../.gitbook/assets/no-dictionary.png)

> The raw format will be used either:

Reviewer: If one of the following is true, Pinot uses the raw format?

> * The dictionary is disabled for that column (see [dictionary documentation page](dictionary-index.md)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The dictionary is disabled for that column (see [Dictionary index](dictionary-index.md)).
```

* The encoding is set to `RAW` in [field config list](../../configuration-reference/table.md#field-config-list).

> Also when this format is used, the following parameters can be configured:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the encoding is set to `RAW`, the following parameters can be configured:
```

| Parameter              | Default | Description                                                                      |
|------------------------|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| chunkCompressionType   | null    | The compression that will be used.                                               |
| deriveNumDocsPerChunk  | false   | Modifies the behavior when storing variable length values (like string or bytes) |
| rawIndexWriterVersion  | 2       | The version initially used                                                       |

The `chunkCompressionType` parameter has the following valid values:
- `PASS_THROUGH`
- `SNAPPY`
- `ZSTANDARD`
- `LZ4`
- `LZ4_LENGTH_PREFIXED`
- `null` (the JSON null value, not `"null"`), which is the default.

>   In this case `PASS_THROUGH` will be used for metrics and `LZ4` for other columns

Reviewer: in what case?

`deriveNumDocsPerChunk` is only used when the datatype may have a variable length.
For example with `string`, `big decimal`, `bytes`, etc.

> By default, Pinot uses a fixed number of elements that was chosen empirically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Pinot uses a fixed number of elements chosen empirically.
```

> If changed to true, Pinot will use a heuristic value that depends on the column data.

Reviewer: If `deriveNumDocsPerChunk` is true?

> If changed to true, Pinot will use a heuristic value that depends on the column data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If changed to true, Pinot uses a heuristic value that depends on the column data.
```

Reviewer: depends on what column data?
what value for which types of column data?

> `rawIndexWriterVersion` changes the algorithm used under the hood to create the index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`rawIndexWriterVersion` changes the algorithm used to create the index.
```

This changes the actual data layout, but modern versions of Pinot can read indexes written in older versions.

> The latest version right now is 4.

Reviewer: setting this parameter to `true`? changes the data layout how?

...also not clear about Pinot versioning here. Could we say Pinot 1.0 can read indexes written in version ? and earlier....

### Configuration

> The recommended way to configure the forward index using raw format is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend configuring the forward index using raw format as shown below:
```

{% code title="Configured in tableConfig fieldConfigList" %}
```javascript
{
  "tableName": "somePinotTable",
  "fieldConfigList": [
    {
      "name": "playerID",
      "encodingType": "RAW",
      "indexes": {
        "forward": {
          "chunkCompressionType": "PASS_THROUGH", // or "SNAPPY", "ZSTANDARD", "LZ4" or "LZ4_LENGTH_PREFIXED"
          "deriveNumDocsPerChunk": false,
          "rawIndexWriterVersion": 2
        }
      }
    },
    ...
  ],
...
}
```
{% endcode %}

> Remember this format can be enabled even if `encodingType` is not defined by explicitly disabling the dictionary index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This format can be enabled even if `encodingType` is not defined by explicitly disabling the dictionary index.
```

> (see [dictionary documentation page](dictionary-index.md)).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see [Dictionary index](dictionary-index.md).  
```

#### Deprecated

> There is another way to configure the raw format parameters:

Reviewer: are these other ways now deprecated? 
Sounds like this is something that folks can still do

* chunkCompressionType: Can be defined as a sibling of `name` and `encodingType` in fieldConfigList section.
* deriveNumDocsPerChunk: Can be configured with the property `deriveNumDocsPerChunkForRawIndex`. 
  Remember that in `properties` all values have to be strings, so valid values are `"true"` and `"false"`. 

> * rawIndexWriterVersion: Can be configured with the property `rawIndexWriterVersion`.

Reviewer: the same name intended here?

  Remember that in `properties` all values have to be strings, so valid values are `"2"`, `"3"`, etc.

This is the older way to configure these parameters and although it is not recommended, it can still be used and there 

> is no plans to remove it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although we do not recommend this configuration, it can still be used.
```
```

Reviewer: As a best practice, it may be helpful to omit deprecated configurations moving forward

> In case new parameters are added, they may only be configured in the `forward` JSON object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New parameters must be configured in the `forward` JSON object.
```

Forward index on one or more columns(s) in your Pinot table can be disabled with the following limitations:

* Only supported for immutable (offline) segments.

> * If the column has a [range index](./range-index.md) then the column must be of single-value type and use range index version 2.

Reviewer: how can folks tell which version of an index they are using?

Sorted columns will allow the forward index to be disabled, but this operation will be treated as a no-op and the index (which acts as both a forward index and inverted index) will be created.

Like all indexes, forward index can be disabled in `fieldConfigList` explicitly setting the `disabled` property to true:

{% code title="Configured in tableConfig fieldConfigList" %}
```javascript
{
  "tableName": "somePinotTable",
  "fieldConfigList": [
    {
      "name":"columnA",
      "indexes": {
        "forward": {
          "disabled": true
        }
      }
    },
    ...
  ],
  ...
}
```
{% endcode %}

The older way to do so is still supported, but not recommended.

{% code title="Configured in tableConfig fieldConfigList" %}
```javascript
"fieldConfigList":[
  {
     "name":"columnA",
     "properties": {
        "forwardIndexDisabled": "true"
      }
  }
]
```
{% endcode %}

A table reload operation must be performed for the above config to take effect. Enabling / disabling other indexes on the column can be done via the usual [table config](../../configuration-reference/table.md) options.

> The forward index can also be regenerated for a column where it is disabled by removing enable the index again and reloading the segment. The forward index can only be regenerated if the dictionary and inverted index have been enabled for the column. If either have been disabled then the only way to get the forward index back is to regenerate the segments via the offline jobs and re-push / refresh the data.

Reviewer: by setting the`"forwardIndexDisabled"` to `"false"` and reloading the index again?
